\chapter*{Introduction}
The previous century has witnessed what is now called the digital revolution. The introduction of
computers dramatically altered multiple aspects of our lives. In particular, almost every area of
science benefitted hugely from the increasingly available computational power \cite{winsberg}.
Physics was no exception and numerical simulations now commonly assist experiments.

Simulating quantum systems -- a holy grail of modern computational physics -- is a highly
challenging task for classical computers \cite{feynman.82}. The difficulties can be blamed on the
enormous sizes of the state spaces of such systems. Direct, naive simulations would require solving
systems of differential equations with the number of variables exponential in the number of
particles. But what about using more sophisticated algorithms? Surprisingly, it is commonly believed
that a sufficiently efficient classical algorithm for simulating quantum systems does not exist
\cite{feynman.82, poplavskii}. Matters seem even worse when one considers that increase in the
classical devices' computational power cannot accelerate infinitely. Moore's law \cite{mack}, which
so far well predicted this growth, is expected to slow down in the years to come \cite{waldrop,
kumar}.

If classical computers cannot simulate quantum physics efficiently, what device can? In the 1980s
Richard Feynmann and Paul Benioff put forward the idea that quantum devices can be used to carry
simulations of quantum systems \cite{feynman.82,benioff.80}. This idea led to the development of
several quantum computation models. In 1985 David Deutsh described a universal, gate--based quantum
computer \cite{deutsch}, a device capable of simulating any other quantum computer with at most
polynomial slowdown. The 1990s and early 2000s saw the emergence of another model of quantum
computation, Adiabatic Quantum Computing (AQC) \cite{kadowaki,farhi}. Interestingly, AQC was later
proven to be equivalent to the standard gate--based model \cite{aharonov}.

Just like a classical computer, a quantum computer needs software to run. And software is based on
algorithms, describing how the computation should be performed. It is not a surprise that quantum
computers operate in a very different way than classical ones, and so they require different,
specialized algorithms. What is surprising is that several notable quantum algorithms were developed
even before the first quantum computers were constructed. In 1994 Peter Shor published his, now
famous, algorithm for integer factorization \cite{shor}. Shor's algorithm demonstrated that quantum
computers are (in principle) capable of solving problems intractable by the classical ones
\cite{kleinjung}. It was also shown that quantum computers could offer a significant performance
boost for easier problems. For instance, in 1996 Grover presented a quantum algorithm for
unstructured database search \cite{grover}, offering quadratic speedup over classical approaches. 

The invention of specialized quantum algorithms further fueled interest in the field. In recent years we observed an unprecedented development of hardware that brings us closer to the quantum revolution. Several implementations of gate--based quantum computers \cite{ionq, bohnet} and quantum annealers \cite{johnson, dattani} were constructed and made publicly available. This allowed scientists to benchmark them and further research their possible applications.

However promising, near-term quantum computers are far from perfect. One could ask whether already
these noisy devices can be used for simulating the dynamics of quantum systems. In this thesis, we
are aiming to show that this is indeed the case, and present-day quantum annealers can be used in a
hybrid, parallel-in-time algorithm simulating small quantum systems. While our algorithm is only a
proof of concept, it exemplifies possible directions of future research.

A key component in assessing the performance of current quantum annealers is comparing them to the
classical algorithms solving the same problems. While there exist plethora of general heuristic
methods for finding a ground state of Ising spin--glass, one can ask if it is possible to construct
a better algorithm tailored for problems defined on the same graph as the physical device. As the
next point in the thesis, we present a recent, heuristic algorithm for finding the low-energy
spectrum of an Ising spin--glass based on tensor-networks specifically suited for problems defined
on Chimera-like graphs.

The last chapter of the thesis describes a fast, parallel approach for exhaustively searching for
low--energy spectrum of Ising spin--glass problems. Our method is suitable for solving small (less
than 50 spins), but otherwise arbitrary instances. The presented approach can be used for
benchmarking other algorithms that cannot certify their solution. We exemplify its usage by
benchmarking a recent MPS--based algorithm on a set of random spin-glass problems.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../main"
%%% End:
